Move the descriptions of LocalWaker and Waker and the primary focus. (#15)
aturon/rfcs: text/0000-futures.md

like with `Iterator`s. Initially these adapters will be provided entirely "out
of tree", but eventually they will make their way into the standard library.

Ultimately asynchronous computations are executed in the form of *tasks*,

> which are comparable to lightweight threads. A task is a `()`-producing `Future`,

Reviewer: > A task is a `()`-producing `Future`

This was a [point of contention](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rs/issues/1087) back when 0.3 was being implemented, the [final verdict](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/52610) was that _the future is not the task_, the task is a concept on top of the future that is executor specific and not directly exposed in any APIs (indirectly the APIs under `core::task` are used by the executor to communicate with the future that is at the root of the task).

Author: Yes, it's true. The idea was to describe that a task is some kind of running version of a `Future` that is owned by the executor and accompanied by some extra state. Will try to make it clearer.

Author: I updated the wording, and think it's better now. But I would also be fine with the one that MajorBreakfast added in 
https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/52610

which is owned by an *executor*, and polled to completion while the being pinned.

> *executor*s provide the ability to "spawn" such `Future`s.

Reviewer: This was an issue with the previous text here, but anyway:

Not all executors will provide an ability to "spawn", the common minimal functionality of an executor is just to "run" futures.

Author: I thought spawning one future (like `block_on` does) is still spawning. But I can see how it is misleading. Updated

> *executor*'s provide the ability to "spawn" such `Future`s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*executor*s provide the ability to "spawn" such `Future`s.
```

> The implementation of an **executor** schedules the `task` it owns in a cooperative

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation of an executor schedules the task it owns in a cooperative
```

> fashion. It is up to the implementation of an **executor** whether on or more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fashion. It is up to the implementation of an executor whether on or more
```

> operation system threads are used for this, as well as how many `task`s can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operation system threads are used for this, as well as how many tasks can be
```

ecosystem will implement this functionality. The exception will be highly
specialized executors, which e.g. want to avoid the cost of all synchronization.

Calling the `wake()` method on a `Waker` will in general be more expensive than
on a `LocalWaker` instance, due to additional synchronization.

Executors will always pass a `LocalWaker` instance to the tasks they poll.

The mechanism through which tasks get scheduled again depends on the executor
which is driving the task.
Possible ways of waking up a an executor include:
- If the executor is blocked on a condition variable, the condition variable
  needs to get notified.
- If the executor is blocked on a system call like `select`, it might need
  to get woken up by a syscall like `write` to a pipe.
- If the executor's thread is parked, the wakeup call needs to unpark it.

In order to accomodate for this behavior, the `Waker` and `LocalWaker` types are
defined through a `RawWaker` type, which is an struct that defines a dynamic
dispatch mechanism, which consists of an raw object pointer and a virtual function
pointer table (vtable). This mechanism allows implementors of an executor to

> customize the behavior of `RawWaker`, `Waker` and `LocalWaker` objects.

Reviewer: Maybe this should be something like

> This mechanism allows implementers of an executor to customize the behavior of `Waker` and `LocalWaker` objects by providing an executor specific `RawWaker`.

Specifically noting that executors aren't directly customizing the `[Local]Waker`.

Author: sounds good. I will change it.

/// customizes the behavior of the `RawWaker`.
#[derive(PartialEq)]
pub struct RawWaker {
    /// A data pointer, which can be used to store arbitrary data as required
    /// by the executor. This could be e.g. a type-erased pointer to an `Arc`
    /// that is associated with the task.
    /// The value of this field gets passed to all functions that are part of
    /// the vtable as first parameter.
    pub data: *const (),
    /// Virtual function pointer table that customizes the behavior if this waker.
    pub vtable: &'static RawWakerVTable,
}

/// A virtual function pointer table (vtable) that allows to customize the
/// behavior of a `RawWaker`.
/// The pointers which get passed to all functions inside the vtable are the
/// values of the `data` field.
#[derive(PartialEq, Copy, Clone)]
pub struct RawWakerVTable {
    /// This function will be called when the `RawWaker` gets cloned, e.g. when
    /// the `Waker` or `LocalWaker` in which the `RawWaker` is stored gets cloned.
    /// The implementation of this function must retain all resources that are
    /// required for this additional instance of a `RawWaker` and associated
    /// task.

>     pub clone: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> RawWaker,

Reviewer: I really wish we had `unsafe` closures, then this could be implemented something like

```rust
static VTABLE: RawWakerVTable = RawWakerVTable {
    clone: unsafe |data| (data as *const ActualWaker as &'static ActualWaker).clone(),
    ...
}
```

Author: I had the same realization while implementing things. But it's more a cosmetic issue for very trivial use-cases than a blocker.

Reviewer: Yep, this was more a comment in support of `unsafe` closures in case they're ever proposed and I remember to link here, rather than a downside of this change. I managed to workaround the lack of them with

```rust
RawWakerVTable {
    clone: {
        |data| (data as *const EmbrioWaker as &'static EmbrioWaker).raw_waker()
    } as fn(*const ()) -> RawWaker as unsafe fn(*const ()) -> RawWaker,
    ...
}
```

to avoid having to create a whole lot of one line functions.

### Waking up

If a future can not be directly fulfilled during execution and returns `Pending`,
it needs a way to later on inform the executor that it needs to get polled again
to make progress.

This functionality is provided through a set of `Waker` types.

`Waker`s are objects which are passed as a parameter to the `Future::poll` call,
and which can be stored by the implementation of those `Futures`s. Whenever a
`Future` has the need to get polled again, it can use the `wake` method of the
waker in order to inform the executor that the `task` which owns the `Future`
should get scheduled and executed again.

> The RFC defines 2 concrete `Waker` types, with which implementors of `Futures`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The RFC defines two concrete `Waker` types, with which implementors of `Futures`
```

and asynchronous functions will interact: `Waker` and `LocalWaker`. Both of
these types define a `wake(&self)` function which is used to schedule the `task`
that is associated to the `Waker` again.

The difference between those types is that `Waker` implements the `Send` and `Sync`
marker traits, while `LocalWaker` doesn't. This means a `Waker` can be sent to

> another thread and stored there in order to wake up the associated `task` later on,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
another thread and stored there in order to wake up the associated task later on,
```

while a `LocalWaker` can't be sent. Depending on the capabilities of the underlying
executor a `LocalWaker` can be converted into a `Waker`. Most executors in the
ecosystem will implement this functionality. The exception will be highly
specialized executors, which e.g. want to avoid the cost of all synchronization.

Calling the `wake()` method on a `Waker` will in general be more expensive than
on a `LocalWaker` instance, due to additional synchronization.

> Executors will always pass a `LocalWaker` instance to the `task`s they poll.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Executors will always pass a `LocalWaker` instance to the tasks they poll.
```

> The mechanism through which `task`s get scheduled again depends on the **executor**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The mechanism through which tasks get scheduled again depends on the executor
```

> which is driving the `task`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is driving the task.
```

Possible ways of waking up a an executor include:

> - If the **executor** is blocked on a condition variable, the condition variable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the executor is blocked on a condition variable, the condition variable
```

  needs to get notified.

> - If the **executor** is blocked on a system call like `select`, it might need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the executor is blocked on a system call like `select`, it might need
```

  to get woken up by a syscall like `write` to a pipe.

> - If the **executor**'s thread is parked, the wakeup call needs to unpark it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the executor's thread is parked, the wakeup call needs to unpark it.
```

In order to accomodate for this behavior, the `Waker` and `LocalWaker` types are
defined through a `RawWaker` type, which is an struct that defines a dynamic
dispatch mechanism, which consists of an raw object pointer and a virtual function

> pointer table (vtable). This mechanism allows implementors of an **executor** to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pointer table (vtable). This mechanism allows implementors of an executor to
```

    /// task.
    pub clone: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> *const (),
    /// This function will be called when a `LocalWaker` should be converted into
    /// a thread-safe `Waker`. The implementation of this function must return
    /// a new `RawWaker` which can fulfill the requirements of `Waker`. It can
    /// exchange the vtable for that purpose. E.g. it might replace the `wake`
    /// function with a varient that supports cross-thread wakeups.
    ///
    /// The old `LocalWaker` which contained the data pointer should be consumed
    /// while performing the operation. After the operation the `LocalWaker`
    /// won't exist anymore, only the new `Waker`.
    /// This means that if both instances would utilize the same reference-counted
    /// data, changing the reference count would not be necessary.
    ///
    /// If a conversion is not supported, the implementation should return
    /// `INVALID_RAW_WAKER`. In this case the implementation must still make
    /// sure that the data pointer which is passed to the function is correctly
    /// released, e.g. by calling the associated `drop_fn` on it.

>     pub into_waker: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> RawWaker,

Reviewer 2: We could consider returning an `Option` instead?

Author: Yes, that's actually a lot better. I changed it.

            // the refcount on it.
            mem::forget(self);
            if raw_waker == INVALID_RAW_WAKER {
                return None;
            }
            Some(Waker::new_unchecked(raw_waker))
        }
    }

    /// Returns whether or not this LocalWaker and other LocalWaker awaken the same task.
    ///
    /// This function works on a best-effort basis, and may return false even
    /// when the LocalWakers would awaken the same task. However, if this function
    /// returns true, it is guaranteed that the LocalWakers will awaken the same task.
    ///
    /// This function is primarily used for optimization purposes.
    pub fn will_wake(&self, other: &LocalWaker) -> bool {
        self.waker == other.waker
    }

    /// Creates a new `LocalWaker` from `RawWaker`.
    ///
    /// The method can not check whether `RawWaker` fulfills the required API
    /// contract to make it usable for `LocalWaker` and is therefore unsafe.
    pub unsafe fn new_unchecked(waker: RawWaker) -> LocalWaker {
        LocalWaker {
            waker: waker,
        }
    }
}

// The implementations of `Clone` and `Drop` follow what is shown in for `Waker`.

> // TODO: Should `Waker` still implement `From<LocalWaker>` or potentially `TryFrom`?

Reviewer 2: The `into_waker` method seems like enough.

```

`Waker`s must fulfill the following requirements:
- They must be cloneable

> - If all instances of a `Waker` have been dropped and their associated `task` had

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If all instances of a `Waker` have been dropped and their associated task had
```

>   been driven to completion, all resources which had been allocated for the `task`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  been driven to completion, all resources which had been allocated for the task
```

### Waking up

> If a future can not be directly fulfilled during execution and returns `Pending`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a future cannot be directly fulfilled during execution and returns `Pending`,
```

it needs a way to later on inform the executor that it needs to get polled again
to make progress.

This functionality is provided through a set of `Waker` types.

`Waker`s are objects which are passed as a parameter to the `Future::poll` call,
and which can be stored by the implementation of those `Futures`s. Whenever a
`Future` has the need to get polled again, it can use the `wake` method of the

> waker in order to inform the executor that the task which owns the `Future`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
waker to inform the executor that the task which owns the `Future`
```

Author: I actually find it clearer that way, but that might be my non native speaker understanding. Open for further feedback around this (and the similar open things).

Thanks for all the suggestions!

Reviewer 3: Generally speaking, the phrase "in order to" can be replaced with "to" since the former is *redundant*. It also contributes to the length and *wordiness* of a sentence which is good to avoid because you only have so much *"attention budget"* when people are reading.

- https://blog.apastyle.org/apastyle/2015/09/principles-of-writing-how-to-avoid-wordiness.html
- https://www.oxford-royale.co.uk/articles/clumsy-phrases-avoid.html

I'm not a native English speaker myself, but this advice is what my English-technical-writing professors gave ;)

should get scheduled and executed again.

The RFC defines two concrete `Waker` types, with which implementors of `Futures`
and asynchronous functions will interact: `Waker` and `LocalWaker`. Both of
these types define a `wake(&self)` function which is used to schedule the task
that is associated to the `Waker` again.

The difference between those types is that `Waker` implements the `Send` and `Sync`
marker traits, while `LocalWaker` doesn't. This means a `Waker` can be sent to

> another thread and stored there in order to wake up the associated task later on,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
another thread and stored there to wake up the associated task later on,
```

Reviewer 4: I don't read "stored there in order to" and "stored there to" the same way. The latter implies that the act of storing has an effect, whereas the former implies that storing enables an effect that is triggered some other way.

Reviewer 3: I read both as "enabling an effect.."; As I said above (https://github.com/aturon/rfcs/pull/15#discussion_r239990861), "in order to" is syntactic salt... If you want to make any distinction in meaning clearer you can instead write:

> This means that a `Waker` can be sent to another thread and stored there so that later on, the associated task can be woken up. Meanwhile, a `LocalWaker` cannot be sent.

> while a `LocalWaker` can't be sent. Depending on the capabilities of the underlying

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
while a `LocalWaker` cannot be sent. Depending on the capabilities of the underlying
```

executor a `LocalWaker` can be converted into a `Waker`. Most executors in the
ecosystem will implement this functionality. The exception will be highly
specialized executors, which e.g. want to avoid the cost of all synchronization.

Calling the `wake()` method on a `Waker` will in general be more expensive than
on a `LocalWaker` instance, due to additional synchronization.

Executors will always pass a `LocalWaker` instance to the tasks they poll.

The mechanism through which tasks get scheduled again depends on the executor
which is driving the task.
Possible ways of waking up a an executor include:
- If the executor is blocked on a condition variable, the condition variable
  needs to get notified.
- If the executor is blocked on a system call like `select`, it might need
  to get woken up by a syscall like `write` to a pipe.
- If the executor's thread is parked, the wakeup call needs to unpark it.

> In order to accomodate for this behavior, the `Waker` and `LocalWaker` types are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To accommodate this behavior, the `Waker` and `LocalWaker` types are
```

defined through a `RawWaker` type, which is an struct that defines a dynamic
dispatch mechanism, which consists of an raw object pointer and a virtual function
pointer table (vtable). This mechanism allows implementers of an executor to
customize the behavior of `Waker` and `LocalWaker` objects by providing an
executor-specific `RawWaker`.

This mechanism is chosen in favor of trait objects since it allows for more
flexible memory management schemes. `RawWaker` can be implemented purely in
terms of global functions and state, on top of reference counted objects, or
in other ways.

The relation between those `Waker` types is outlined in the following definitions:

```rust
/// A `RawWaker` allows the implementor of a task executor to customize the
/// behavior of `LocalWaker`s and `Waker`s.

> /// It consists of a data pointer a virtual function pointer table (vtable) that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
/// It consists of a data pointer and a virtual function pointer table (vtable) that
```

/// customizes the behavior of the `RawWaker`.
#[derive(PartialEq)]
pub struct RawWaker {
    /// A data pointer, which can be used to store arbitrary data as required
    /// by the executor. This could be e.g. a type-erased pointer to an `Arc`
    /// that is associated with the task.
    /// The value of this field gets passed to all functions that are part of
    /// the vtable as first parameter.
    pub data: *const (),

>     /// Virtual function pointer table that customizes the behavior if this waker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// Virtual function pointer table that customizes the behavior of this waker.
```

    pub vtable: &'static RawWakerVTable,
}

/// A virtual function pointer table (vtable) that allows to customize the
/// behavior of a `RawWaker`.
/// The pointers which get passed to all functions inside the vtable are the
/// values of the `data` field.
#[derive(PartialEq, Copy, Clone)]
pub struct RawWakerVTable {
    /// This function will be called when the `RawWaker` gets cloned, e.g. when
    /// the `Waker` or `LocalWaker` in which the `RawWaker` is stored gets cloned.
    /// The implementation of this function must retain all resources that are
    /// required for this additional instance of a `RawWaker` and associated
    /// task.

>     pub clone: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> RawWaker,

Reviewer 3: This is an `unsafe fn` pointer; but what are the invariants the function requires from its callers? It should be clearly specified in terms of "Behavior is undefined if X.". The same applies to the subsequent 3 unsafe function pointers.

Reviewer 5: Specifically, it seems to me that the requirement should be that callers must pass the data pointer of the `RawWaker` that this table was created as a part of. Behavior is undefined if any other pointer is passed.

I don't see any other source of undefined behavior - aside from taking an over-broad type (`*const ()`), these functions should be perfectly safe.

    /// This function will be called when a `LocalWaker` should be converted into
    /// a thread-safe `Waker`. The implementation of this function must return
    /// a new `RawWaker` which can fulfill the requirements of `Waker`. It can
    /// exchange the vtable for that purpose. E.g. it might replace the `wake`
    /// function with a varient that supports cross-thread wakeups.
    ///
    /// The old `LocalWaker` which contained the data pointer should be consumed
    /// while performing the operation. After the operation the `LocalWaker`
    /// won't exist anymore, only the new `Waker`.
    /// This means that if both instances would utilize the same reference-counted
    /// data, changing the reference count would not be necessary.
    ///
    /// If a conversion is not supported, the implementation should return
    /// `None`. In this case the implementation must still make
    /// sure that the data pointer which is passed to the function is correctly
    /// released, e.g. by calling the associated `drop_fn` on it.

>     pub into_waker: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> Option<RawWaker>,

Reviewer 6: I don't think we should return an `Option` here-- the only reasonable behavior on `None` when you need a `Send`-able waker is to panic, so I think the panic-ing should be left up to the implementation of `into_waker`.

Author: The publicly visible API (`LocalWaker`) has 2 methods:
- `into_waker()` which panics when this delegate returns `None`.
- `try_into_waker()` which forwards the result.

I'm not sure about too many use cases where `try_into_waker()` would be useful apart from maybing printing a compatibility error. But it doesn't really hurt to expose it. And I felt that having the `panic` at a central place instead of in the actual waker implementations seems cleaner. Raises e.g. less questions if the panic happened before or after the old `RawWaker` was consumed.

Reviewer 6: Makes sense! thanks for the explanation

    /// This function will be called when `wake` is called on the `RawWaker`.
    pub wake: unsafe fn(*const ()),
    /// This function gets called when a `RawWaker` gets dropped.
    /// The implementation of this function must make sure to release any
    /// resources that are associated with this instance of a `RawWaker` and
    /// associated task.
    pub drop_fn: unsafe fn(*const ()),
}

/// A `Waker` is a handle for waking up a task by notifying its executor that it
/// is ready to be run.
///
/// This handle encapsulates a `RawWaker` instance, which defines the
/// executor-specific wakeup behavior.
///
/// Implements `Clone`, `Send`, and `Sync`.
pub struct Waker {
    waker: RawWaker,
}

impl Waker {
    /// Wake up the task associated with this `Waker`.
    pub fn wake(&self) {
        // The actual wakeup call is delegated through a virtual function call

>         // to the implementation which is defined by the executor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // to the implementation which is defined by the executor.
```

        unsafe { (self.waker.vtable.wake)(self.waker.data) }
    }

>     /// Returns whether or not this Waker and other Waker awaken the same task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// Returns whether or not this `Waker` and other `Waker` have awaken the same task.
```

    ///
    /// This function works on a best-effort basis, and may return false even

>     /// when the Wakers would awaken the same task. However, if this function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// when the `Waker`s would awaken the same task. However, if this function
```

>     /// returns true, it is guaranteed that the Wakers will awaken the same task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// returns `true`, it is guaranteed that the `Waker`s will awaken the same task.
```

    ///
    /// This function is primarily used for optimization purposes.
    pub fn will_wake(&self, other: &Waker) -> bool {
        self.waker == other.waker
    }

    /// Creates a new `Waker` from `RawWaker`.
    ///

>     /// The method can not check whether `RawWaker` fulfills the required API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// The method cannot check whether `RawWaker` fulfills the required API
```

    /// contract to make it usable for `Waker` and is therefore unsafe.
    pub unsafe fn new_unchecked(waker: RawWaker) -> Waker {
        Waker {
            waker: waker,
        }
    }
}

impl Clone for Waker {
    fn clone(&self) -> Self {
        Waker {
            waker: RawWaker {
                data: unsafe { (self.waker.vtable.clone)(self.waker.data) },
                vtable: self.waker.vtable,
            }
        }
    }
}

impl Drop for Waker {
    fn drop(&mut self) {
        unsafe { (self.waker.vtable.drop_fn)(self.waker.data) }
    }
}

/// A `LocalWaker` is a handle for waking up a task by notifying its executor that it is ready to be run.
///
/// This is similar to the `Waker` type, but cannot be sent across threads.
/// Task executors can use this type to implement more optimized singlethreaded wakeup behavior.
///
/// This handle encapsulates a `RawWaker` instance, which defines the
/// executor-specific wakeup behavior.
///

> /// Implements `Clone`

Reviewer 6: perhaps add ", but not `Send` or `Sync`."

> /// Implements `Clone`

Author: ```suggestion
/// Implements `Clone`, but neither `Send` nor `Sync`
```

    /// getting woken up from a different thread.
    pub fn try_into_waker(self) -> Option<Waker> {
        unsafe {
            let maybe_raw_waker = (self.waker.vtable.into_waker)(self.waker.data);
            // Avoid that the drop runs on self, which would e.g. decrease
            // the refcount on it. The object has been consumed or converted
            // by the `into_waker` function.
            mem::forget(self);
            match maybe_raw_waker {
                Some(rw) => Some(Waker::new_unchecked(rw)),
                None => None,
            }
        }
    }

    /// Returns whether or not this LocalWaker and other LocalWaker awaken the same task.
    ///
    /// This function works on a best-effort basis, and may return false even
    /// when the LocalWakers would awaken the same task. However, if this function
    /// returns true, it is guaranteed that the LocalWakers will awaken the same task.
    ///
    /// This function is primarily used for optimization purposes.
    pub fn will_wake(&self, other: &LocalWaker) -> bool {
        self.waker == other.waker
    }

    /// Creates a new `LocalWaker` from `RawWaker`.
    ///

>     /// The method can not check whether `RawWaker` fulfills the required API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// The method cannot check whether `RawWaker` fulfills the required API
```

    /// contract to make it usable for `LocalWaker` and is therefore unsafe.
    pub unsafe fn new_unchecked(waker: RawWaker) -> LocalWaker {
        LocalWaker {
            waker: waker,
        }
    }
}

// The implementations of `Clone` and `Drop` follow what is shown in for `Waker`.
```

`Waker`s must fulfill the following requirements:

> - They must be cloneable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- They must be cloneable.
```

- If all instances of a `Waker` have been dropped and their associated task had
  been driven to completion, all resources which had been allocated for the task

>   must have been released.

Reviewer 7: Why is this a requirement? I don't disagree with the general logic behind it, I'm just wondering why this is a requirement.

Author: Good question! The question would be if a memory leak is seen as a bug or not. In my opinion it is, that's why I think it should be outlined that proper cleanup is required. Executors with very special use-cases might always be able to ignore this and workaround that.

The requirement is even a pretty weak form, since it it requires **all** Waker instances and the task being completed, and not only the task. However even a completed task should maybe already lead to most or all of the resources in the executor being deallocated.  But due to the way how futures/tasks/wakers work, there might be still wakers stored in some IO sources after the task has already been finished. Those might only get cleared after the IO source change it's state later on, and signaled those. So in those scenarios the weak requirement from above might mean the executor might still have lots of ghost state about a task stored. The alternative would be to require executors to separate between waker state and task state, and at least release most of the task memory after it has been finished (wakers can be still around).

Reviewer 5: While I agree that in practice basically every `Waker` should clean up after itself, I do think calling it a requirement gives the wrong impression. This implies (to me) that a lack of resource leaks is a *safety* property that code can rely on for memory safety. Along the same lines that `std::mem::forget` is safe but not recommended, I think that cleaning up can be mentioned, but should not be a requirement.

- It must be safe to call `wake()` on a `Waker` even if the associated task has
  already been driven to completion.

> - `Waker::wake()` must wake up an executor even if it is called from an arbitry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `Waker::wake()` must wake up an executor even if it is called from an arbitrary
```

  thread.

> An executor which implements `RawWaker` must therefore make sure that all these

Reviewer 3: A `RawWaker` as defined here is not a trait, so how can it be implemented?

Author: Yes the wording isn't ideal. Maybe something along `An executor which creates instances of RawWaker according to it's requirements`?

Reviewer 3: Or just: "An executor that instantiates a `RawWaker` must therefore make sure..."

Author: I went with that

requirements are fulfilled.

> Since many the ownership semantics that are required here can easily be met

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since many of the ownership semantics that are required here can easily be met
```

through a reference-counted `Waker` implementation, a convienence method for
defining `Waker`s is provided, which does not require implementing a `RawWaker`
and the associated vtable manually.

This convience method is based around the `ArcWake` trait. An implementor of
an executor can define a type which implements the `ArcWake` trait as defined

> below. The `ArcWake` type defines the associated method `into_local_waker`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
below. The `ArcWake` trait defines the associated method `into_local_waker`,
```

> which allows to retrieve a `LocalWaker` instance from an `Arc` of this type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which affords retrieving a `LocalWaker` instance from an `Arc` of this type.
```

The returned instance will guarantee that the `wake()` and `wake_local` methods
of the type which implements `ArcWake` are called, whenever `wake()` is called
on a `Waker` or `LocalWaker`.

```rust
/// A way of waking up a specific task.
///
/// By implementing this trait, types that are expected to be wrapped in an `Arc`
/// can be converted into `LocalWaker` and `Waker` objects.
/// Those Wakers can be used to signal executors that a task it owns
/// is ready to be `poll`ed again.
pub trait ArcWake: Send + Sync {
    /// Indicates that the associated task is ready to make progress and should
    /// be `poll`ed.
    ///

>     /// This function can called from the thread on which the `ArcWake` was created,

Reviewer 7: A possible improvement: "This function can be called from an arbitrary thread, including threads which did not create the `ArcWake`."

Otherwise it has a small type-o "... can *be* called ...".

Author: done

>     /// This function can called from the thread on which the `ArcWake` was created,

Author: ```suggestion
    /// This function can be called from an arbitrary thread, including threads which
```

>     /// as well as from any other thread.

Author: ```suggestion
    /// did not create the `ArcWake` based `Waker`.
```

    ///
    /// Executors generally maintain a queue of "ready" tasks; `wake` should place
    /// the associated task onto this queue.
    fn wake(self: &Arc<Self>);

    /// Indicates that the associated task is ready to make progress and should be polled.

>     /// This function is like wake, but will only be called from the thread on which this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// This function is like `wake`, but will only be called from the thread on which this
```

    /// `ArcWake` was created.
    ///
    /// This function is marked unsafe because callers must guarantee that
    /// they call it only on the task on which the `ArcWake` had been created.
    ///
    /// Executors generally maintain a queue of "ready" tasks; `wake_local` should place
    /// the associated task onto this queue.

>     unsafe fn wake_local(self: &Arc<Self>);

Reviewer 6: This should have a default impl to match the current one on nightly:

```rust
unsafe fn wake_local(arc_self: &Arc<Self>) {
    Self::wake(arc_self);
}
```

This makes it possible to create an entirely-safe `ArcWake`.

Author: Yes, I have done this always one my CR for actual rustc locally. Will add it.

However I have left a few comments around the usability of `ArcWake` in general in the comments of the CR. Please review them and comment on what you think.

Reviewer 6: > in the comments of the CR

Sorry, I'm not sure which ones you're referring to, would you mind linking?

Author: https://github.com/aturon/rfcs/pull/15#issuecomment-440159309

In short: Most code seems to really want to create wakers starting through `LocalWakerRef` instead of the associated associated methods, but understanding this (and the whole local/nonlocal thing) seems to be pretty complicated. Therefore it's a bit questionable whether the associated method should be available on `ArcWake`, or whether we want to have `ArcWake` in std/alloc at all.

Reviewer 6: `ArcWake` is definitely useful and should be included-- it's what I use to implement the Fuchsia reactor and the one used in the async book, both of which are 100% safe code. `wake_local` hints that there are optimizations possible for the case when the wakeup is occurring on the same thread as the original task was polled, and that users could optimize based on that. However, I don't know how common these optimizations will be in practice so if you'd rather see `wake_local` dropped, I wouldn't object.

Author: I'm less concerned about `wake_local` and `wake` on the trait and more about the different ways to construct wakers from it. If most people end up not using `::into_local_waker(Self)` in favor of higher performance alternatives like `LocalWakerRef` then it seems a bit questionable. Especially since the audience for these kind of methods is very small (executor authors), and those might want to optimize for high performance.

Reviewer 6: I think the overall number of people implementing any of this will be small. `LocalWakerRef` already exists and is usable. This API should exist to make it clear that this is possible. We could add `LocalWakerRef` to std if we really want at some point, but I don't think it matters greatly either way.

    /// Creates a `LocalWaker` from an Arc<T>, if T implements ArcWake.
    ///
    /// The returned `LocalWaker` will call `wake.wake_local()` when awoken.
    ///
    /// The returned `LocalWaker` can be converted into a `Waker` through
    /// it's `into_waker()` method. If `wake()` is called on this `Waker`,
    /// the `wake()` function that is defined inside this trait will get called.

>     fn into_local_waker(wake: Arc<Self>) -> LocalWaker where Self: Sized;

Reviewer 7: Why isn't this a free standing function in `std::task`? For example `fn arc_waker<W: ArcWake>(waker: Arc<W>) -> LocalWaker`. Is there any reason you decided to add it to the trait?

Author: Yes, that's also possible. Being directly on the trait was the initial proposal from @aturon. I am fine with whatever seems most aligned with similar concerns.
Maybe it should be on an extension trait like `ArcWakeExt`? In the discussion above and the general comments there is also some discussion around other mechanisms to create wakers from `ArcWake`. The more ways there, the less likely they should maybe be directly on the trait.

Reviewer 6: it's currently a free-standing function, and folks found it really hard to discover. Adding it to the trait was supposed to help with that problem.

Reviewer 7: @cramertj But wouldn't adding a link to the free standing function at the `ArcWake` documentation achieve the same result?

### Waking up

If a future cannot be directly fulfilled during execution and returns `Pending`,
it needs a way to later on inform the executor that it needs to get polled again

> to make progress.

Reviewer 8: So how do we wrap with `Future`s asynchronous APIs that do not have a way to inform the execution about this without adding overhead?

    /// a `RawWaker` that implements the same wakeup behavior.
    pub clone: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> RawWaker,
    /// This function will be called when a `LocalWaker` should be converted into
    /// a thread-safe `Waker`. The implementation of this function must return
    /// a new `RawWaker` which can fulfill the requirements of `Waker`. It can
    /// exchange the vtable for that purpose. E.g. it might replace the `wake`
    /// function with a varient that supports cross-thread wakeups.
    ///
    /// The old `LocalWaker` which contained the data pointer should be consumed
    /// while performing the operation. After the operation the `LocalWaker`
    /// won't exist anymore, only the new `Waker`.
    /// This means that if both instances would utilize the same reference-counted
    /// data, changing the reference count would not be necessary.
    ///
    /// If a conversion is not supported, the implementation should return
    /// `None`. In this case the implementation must still make
    /// sure that the data pointer which is passed to the function is correctly
    /// released, e.g. by calling the associated `drop_fn` on it.

>     pub into_waker: unsafe fn(*const ()) -> Option<RawWaker>,

Reviewer 7: Should this function ~~own the data (`*const ()`) and~~ return `Option<Waker>` ~~instead~~? ~~This way if there are two different waking mechanisms for local and sync wakers it would be supported. Furthmore~~ returning a `Waker`, rather then `RawWaker`, makes it clear that all the requirements of the `Waker` type must be met.

Edit: first part was incorrect, as @Nemo157 pointed out.

Reviewer: @Thomasdezeeuw if there are different implementations then the returned `RawWaker` can contain different function pointers.

Reviewer 7: @Nemo157 Right scratch the first part, I had in my head that `data` was part of `Waker`, not `RawWaker`. What are you thoughts about the second part?

Reviewer: I could go either way.  I like the fact that when writing the `RawWaker` type currently you don’t need to import any of the concrete types it will be wrapped in, and think that the documentation is clear enough (and the entire area unsafe enough) that implementors will be careful about what they’re doing. But having to call `Waker::new_unchecked` doesn’t seem like a massive burden (~~although, my current implementation of `RawWaker` is 100% safe code, this would require adding an `unsafe` block to it~~ EDIT: Scratch that, I just realised I have a cast that needs to be a pointer re-reference instead which needs `unsafe`).

Author: I see it the same as @Nemo157: I like the separation of Api concerns. 
There should also be no extra unsafe call involved, since the new_unchecked from the result would happen in LocalWaker::into_waker()

    /// This function will be called when `wake` is called on the `RawWaker`.
    pub wake: unsafe fn(*const ()),
    /// This function gets called when a `RawWaker` gets dropped.
    ///
    /// The implementation of this function must make sure to release any
    /// resources that are associated with this instance of a `RawWaker` and
    /// associated task.
    pub drop_fn: unsafe fn(*const ()),
}

/// A `Waker` is a handle for waking up a task by notifying its executor that it
/// is ready to be run.
///
/// This handle encapsulates a `RawWaker` instance, which defines the
/// executor-specific wakeup behavior.
///
/// Implements `Clone`, `Send`, and `Sync`.
pub struct Waker {
    waker: RawWaker,
}

> 

Reviewer 5: Although it is clearly stated in the documentation, it would still probably be good to include the core difference between `Waker` and `LocalWaker` (the `Send` and `Sync` implementations) in the code snippet.

```suggestion

+unsafe impl Send for Waker { }
+unsafe impl Sync for Waker { }

```

    executor: Arc<ExecutorInner>,
}

impl ArcWake for Task {
    fn wake(self: &Arc<Self>) {
        self.executor.sync_ready_queue.push(self.clone());
    }

    fn wake_local(self: &Arc<Self>) {
        (&mut *self.executor.optimized_queue.get()).push(self.clone())
    }
}
```

The use of `&Arc<Self>` rather than just `&self` makes it possible to work directly with
the trait object for `Wake`, including cloning it.

> It's possible to construct a `Waker` using `From<Arc<dyn Wake>>`. // TODO: Is that really the case or only `impl Wake`?

Reviewer 2: We can drop this sentence.

    ///
    /// The `poll` function takes a [`LocalWaker`], an object which knows how to

>     /// awaken the current task. [`LocalWaker`] is not `Send` nor `Sync`, so in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     /// awaken the current task. [`LocalWaker`] is not `Send` nor `Sync`, so
```

>     /// order to make thread-safe futures the [`LocalWaker::into_waker`] and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    /// to make thread-safe futures the [`LocalWaker::into_waker`] and
```
